# ENMeval
R package for automated runs and evaluations of ecological niche models.

[`ENMeval`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=ENMeval) is an R package that performs automated runs and evaluations of ecological niche models, and currently implements [Maxent](https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~schapire/maxent/). `ENMeval` was made for those who want to "tune" their models to maximize predictive ability and avoid overfitting, or in other words, optimize model complexity to balance goodness-of-fit and predictive ability. The primary function, `ENMevaluate`, does all the heavy lifting and returns several items including a table of evaluation statistics and, for each setting combination (here, colloquially: *runs*), a model object and a raster layer showing the model prediction across the study extent. There are also options for calculating niche overlap between predictions, running in parallel to speed up computation, and more. For a more detailed description of the package, check out the open-access publication:

[Muscarella, R., Galante, P. J., Soley-Guardia, M., Boria, R. A., Kass, J. M., Uriarte, M. and Anderson, R. P. (2014), ENMeval: An R package for conducting spatially independent evaluations and estimating optimal model complexity for Maxent ecological niche models. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 5: 1198–1205.](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12261/full)

News
===
ENMeval 0.3.0
---
- Changed the default behavior to use the 'maxnet' function of the 'maxnet' package instead of the 'maxent.jar' program.
- Added an algorithm slot to the ENMevaluation object
- Added information on the aggregation factor(s) or number of k folds to the ENMevaluation object when relevant.


ENMeval 0.2.2
---
- Added a vignette. Type: vignette('ENMeval-vignette', package='ENMeval')
- Added an option to pass additional arguments to maxent (e.g., prevalence)
- Added a function to extract variable importance for maxent models
- Fixed an inconsistency with the AICc columns of the results table when rasterPreds=F
- Fixed potential errors in the partitioning methods functions when used independently
- Added some progress bar options to increase compatibility with Wallace


ENMeval 0.2.1
---
- Fixed an error in the organization of results table when bin.output=T


ENMeval 0.2.0
---
- Fixed a bug that allowed only a single categorical variable; now multiple categorical variables work.
- Added an option to run the tuning function in parallel.
- Added a slot in ENMevaluation object class to hold Maxent model objects.  This allows the user to access the lambda values and original results table generated by Maxent.
- Added arguments in ENMevaluate function to turn off raster prediction generation to save time.


ENMeval 0.1.1
---
- This version corrects the calc.aicc function that, in version 0.1.0, could give erroneous results when used with multiple models simultaneously.  AICc, delta.AICc, and w.AIC values calculated in v.0.1.0 are potentially flawed!


ENMeval 0.1.0
---
- This is the initial version of ENMeval.  The main function is ENMeval::ENMevaluate().
